stemic inflammation or changes to blood parameters (Bhat et al., 2016). The analyses in the present study are based on 78 blood tests from 45 cats. Neuropathologies We collated information on the minimum age of reported Alzheimer-related neuropathologies (e.g., brain amyloid, tangles) across studies (de Sousa et al., 2023) for humans, chimpanzees, and cats (deSousa et al., 2023). We excluded individuals with neurological conditions associated with early AD pathology (e.g., Down syndrome; see Gunn-Moore et al., 2007 ; Davidson et al., 2018 ), but we included late-onset seizures, defined as occurring after 5 years of age in cats and after 60 in humans ( Hazenfratz and Taylor, 2018 ; Cleary et al., 2004 ), because AD-related pathology may have a link to seizures (Sordo and Gunn-Moore, 2021). The translating time model We selected time points with observations found in at least two species. The dataset contains missing data ( Fig. 1 ). We used the library package Amelia to generate imputed datasets (n=10). Imputed values could not exceed the maximum reported lifespan for the relevant species ( Fig. 1B ). We selected the dataset generating the highest minimum correlation in observations across individuals. We then denoised the imputed dataset with a principal component analysis. We used the imputed dataset to calculate an event scale (example in Fig. 1E ), which is an ordering of time points averaged across species ( Fig. 1A ). We produced a weighted average inversely proportional to the amount of missing data per species ( Fig. 1F ), which assumed that the least complete data should factor less in the calculation of the event scale. The event scale is calcuated by subtracting each averaged time point by the minimum time point and dividing that value by the difference between the maximum and minimum time point. Accordingly, the event scale ranges from 0 to 1. We then fit a linear model with a natural spline to accommodate selective accelerations and decelerations in the pace of development and aging. Results We first compare age-related variation in brain structure in humans and cats, and we used observations across multiple cat populations to compare the pace of pet, colony and wild cats. We use these data to generate a linear model that equates ages across the lifespan of humans, cats, and other species (i.e., chimpanzees, mice). Cats and humans share age-related changes in brain structure We studied age-related changes in brain structure in cats and humans. Brain atrophy becomes more pronounced with age in cats and humans ( Figure 3A and B ). Cats in their teens and humans in their 80s possess relatively enlarged ventricles and a concomitant reduction in brain volume as is evident in an 88-year-old human and a 16-year-old cat ( Figure 3D-F ). We fit significant smooth splines to brain metrics as a function of age to compare age-related trajectories in humans and cats (see Table 1 for significance results). We found that normalized brain volume is rather invariant at early ages and that it subsequently declines gradually. For example, there is a 10 percent decrease in normalized volume between 5 and 10 years of age in cats ( Figure 3A ) and after 50 years of age in humans ( Figure 3B ). Some metrics decrease whereas others increase with age. I